WIP: Add Microarray Pathway Analysis - GSEA example (#339)
AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples: 02-microarray/pathway-analysis_microarray_07_gsea.Rmd

```{r}
dge_df
```

## Getting familiar with `clusterProfiler`'s options

Let's take a look at what organisms the package supports.

```{r}
msigdbr_species()
```
**DRAFT**
MSigDB contains [8 different gene set collections](https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/collections.jsp) [@Subramanian2005].

    H: hallmark gene sets
    C1: positional gene sets
    C2: curated gene sets
    C3: motif gene sets
    C4: computational gene sets
    C5: GO gene sets
    C6: oncogenic signatures
    C7: immunologic signatures

MSigDB includes a collection called Hallmark gene sets ([Liberzon *et al.* 2015](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cels.2015.12.004))
Here's an excerpt of the [collection description](https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/collection_details.jsp#H):

Hallmark gene sets summarize and represent specific well-defined biological states or processes and display coherent expression.
These gene sets were generated by a computational methodology based on identifying gene set overlaps and retaining genes that display coordinate expression.
The hallmarks reduce noise and redundancy and provide a better delineated biological space for GSEA.
We'll use the Hallmark collection for GSEA.

> Notably, there are only 50 gene sets included in this collection.

Reviewer: To clarify a point from your initial comment:

> I used the hallmark genes dataset (rather than all genes)

> The genes of interest list step (step 6 of the original plan) did not seem beneficial/best suited for this analysis once I got into developing as the hallmark genes dataset is used, already limiting the genes shown in this example

By using the hallmark gene sets, you're limiting the number of _gene sets_ you are testing. These gene sets will contain differing numbers of genes. So Hallmark Gene Set A  could contain 35 genes, and Hallmark Gene Set B could have 135 genes. The preranked statistics that you pass to `GSEA()` are genome-wide (or at least everything that you have in the DGE table). The union of the genes that are in the Hallmark sets are fewer than you'll have in your DGE table, but the same could be said about KEGG pathways or one of the other collections.

Because each gene set included is a test, by reducing the number of tests you run, you lower your multiple hypothesis testing burden (and your run time, too!). I would not conceptualize this as using fewer genes overall, though.

Author: Gotcha!

We can see what types of IDs are available to us in an annotation package with `keytypes()`.

```{r}
keytypes(org.Dr.eg.db)
```

Even though we'll use this package to convert from Ensembl gene IDs (`ENSEMBL`) to Entrez IDs (`ENTREZID`), we could just as easily use it to convert from an Ensembl transcript ID (`ENSEMBLTRANS`) to gene symbols (`SYMBOL`).

The function we will use to map from Ensembl gene IDs to Entrez gene IDs is called `mapIds()`.

Let's create a column in the `dge_df` data frame that shows the mapped Entrez IDs along with the information for the respective Ensembl IDs.

```{r}
# We would like a data frame we can join to the differential expression stats
dge_df <- dge_df %>%
  # Create a new column 'entrez_id' that contains the Entrez IDs returned by
  # mapIds()
  dplyr::mutate(entrez_id = mapIds(org.Dr.eg.db,
    keys = dge_df$Gene,
    column = "ENTREZID",
    keytype = "ENSEMBL",
    multiVals = "first"
  )) %>%
  # If an Ensembl gene identifier doesn't map to a Entrez gene identifier, drop that
  # from the data frame
  dplyr::filter(!is.na(entrez_id))
```

> This message is letting us know that sometimes Ensembl gene identifiers will map to multiple Entrez IDs.

Reviewer: How many duplicate Entrez IDs do we end up with here?

Author: Once the NAs are filtered out, it looks like we end up with two duplicate Entrez IDs according to:

<img width="266" alt="Screen Shot 2020-10-29 at 10 45 53 AM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43576623/97589563-099d5880-19d4-11eb-9960-3b7fd30d0fe3.png">

> In this case, it's also possible that a gene symbol will map to multiple Ensembl IDs.

Reviewer: We're not in detailed review mode yet but I did notice this 
```suggestion
In this case, it's also possible that a Entrez ID will map to multiple Ensembl IDs.
```

For more about how to explore this, take a look at our [microarray gene ID conversion example](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/02-microarray/gene-id-annotation_microarray_01_ensembl.html).

Let's see a preview of the new `dge_df`. 

```{r}
head(dge_df)
```

## Perform gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)

**DRAFT**
Gene set enrichment testing using `clusterProfiler` is based on... [@clusterProfiler-book].

### Determine our pre-ranked genes list

The `GSEA()` function takes a pre-ranked (sorted) named vector of statistics, where the names in the vector are gene identifiers.
This is step 1 -- gene-level statistics.

```{r}

> lfc_vector <- dge_df$logFC

Reviewer: This is the preferred stat to use for DESeq2 results, which is what we use in training. I _think_ `t` would be more "standard" in this scenario. I'm not sure that it matters much outside of making sure we are talking about what the GSEA scores are telling us based on the values we use for ranking.

lfc_vector <- sort(lfc_vector, decreasing = TRUE)
```

```{r}
# Look at first entries of the log2 fold change vector
head(lfc_vector)
```

### Run GSEA using the `GSEA()` function

**DRAFT**
The enrichment score (ES) for a pathway, a pathway-level statistic, is calculated using our gene-level statistics.
Genes are ranked from most highly positive to most highly negative and weighting them according to their gene-level statistic.
A running score is calculated by starting with the most highly ranked genes and increasing the score when a gene is in the pathway and decreasing the score when a gene is not in the pathway.
The ES is the maximum deviation from zero.
Significance is assessed by generating a null distribution by sampling random gene sets of the same size and an FDR (false discovery rate) value is calculated to account for multiple hypothesis testing.
([Subramanian 2005](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102); [Korotkevich 2019](https://doi.org/10.1101/060012)).

**REVIEW**
We can use the `GSEA()` function to perform GSEA with any generic set of gene sets, but there are several functions for using specific, commonly used gene sets (e.g., `gseKEGG()`).

```{r}

> gsea_results <- GSEA(

Author: Good point, I'll look into this.

> gsea_results <- GSEA(

Reviewer 2: Ah. Okay, I wasn't sure what you meant by `arbitrarily small P-values`; it looks like `fgseaMultilevel()` does resampling with Monte Carlo simulations whereas  `fgseaSimple()` does not (just runs it once). So `fgseaMultilevel()` re-runs the analysis with a bunch of different subsets to get more validated p values. 

We can probably just run the `Simple` one? What do you think? But also if we do use `fgseaMultilevel()` we'll need to look into setting the seed.

> gsea_results <- GSEA(

Author: This will likely be elaborated in PR 2 of 2, but it seems that `fgseaMultilevel()` is the recommended approach to use and the default for `clusterProfiler::GSEA()` when the `nPerm` argument is not provided (info gathered partly from docs and partly from the warning message below):

<img width="788" alt="Screen Shot 2020-10-29 at 1 09 40 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43576623/97742535-cb2e9900-1aba-11eb-9ba3-b7d047df3d99.png">

Also, when attempting to run `fgseaSimple()`, 0 results were returned (could be an error in my implementation however).

> gsea_results <- GSEA(

Reviewer 2: Great! I was wondering if you saw any recommendations. Let's use what they recommend then!

  geneList = lfc_vector, # ordered ranked gene list
  nPerm = 1000, # number of permutations
  minGSSize = 25, # minimum gene set size
  maxGSSize = 500, # maximum gene set set
  pvalueCutoff = 0.05,
  pAdjustMethod = "BH", # Benjamini-Hochberg correction
  TERM2GENE = dplyr::select(
    dr_hallmark_df,
    gs_name,
    entrez_gene
  )
)
```

Let's take a look at the results.

```{r}
head(gsea_results@result %>%
  dplyr::arrange(dplyr::desc(NES)))
```

Normalized enrichment scores (NES) are enrichment scores that are scaled to make gene sets that contain different number of genes comparable.

The information we're most likely interested in is in the `results` slot.
Let's convert this into a data frame that we can write to file.

```{r}
gsea_result_df <- data.frame(gsea_results@result)
```

> Let's print out a sneak peek of it here and take a look at how many sets do we have that fit our cutoff of `0.1` FDR? 

Reviewer 2: This filter step and the one for ORA is meant to show users how to check if they have significant results. If they don't, the plots just show up blank which may be confusing to users. Seeing blank plots probably wouldn't be clear to users.  

If this isn't clear, we should add some wording to make it clear what this step is for. We could explain that blank plots is what happens too?

> Let's print out a sneak peek of it here and take a look at how many sets do we have that fit our cutoff of `0.1` FDR? 

Reviewer: I see. I think my comment about the filter value matching `pvalueCutoff` still stands. The following code more closely aligns with what you are trying to show in my opinion (note that I am familiar with `any()` and `$` notation and our users may be less so; untested) 

```R
any(gsea_result_df$p.adjust < <THRESHOLD>)
```

And I agree that we could say, when we get to the visualization step, if you see blank plots it's because nothing met your `pvalueCutoff` if that is the situation that creates blank plots.

> Let's print out a sneak peek of it here and take a look at how many sets do we have that fit our cutoff of `0.1` FDR? 

Reviewer 2: I also think it's also helpful to see what the output looks like which the logic above wouldn't show you.

> Let's print out a sneak peek of it here and take a look at how many sets do we have that fit our cutoff of `0.1` FDR? 

Reviewer 2: Though I do like making it a definitive TRUE/FALSE test.

> Let's print out a sneak peek of it here and take a look at how many sets do we have that fit our cutoff of `0.1` FDR? 

Reviewer: You see some version of the output in 
```R
head(gsea_results@result %>%
  dplyr::arrange(dplyr::desc(NES)))
```

which is a lot to take in - so I think one could simplify that a bit and then use `any()` here.

> Let's print out a sneak peek of it here and take a look at how many sets do we have that fit our cutoff of `0.1` FDR? 

Reviewer 2: Ah cool. Sounds good then.
